---
title: "Working with Templates"
weight: 1
date: 2022-12-04T10:35:15+01:00
draft: false
---

{{< toc format=html >}}

Yamldocs works by default with [Stencil](https://github.com/minicli/stencil) templates, a simple templating library that is often used to bootstrap files and has no external dependencies.

There are two templates included within the application's `/templates` folder:

- reference_page.tpl
- reference_page_section.tpl

These templates are used by the `DefaultBuilder` to build the final markdown through the built-in build commands. If you want to customize the templates, you need to overwrite them. Set the templates in a folder inside your app and set up a `templatesDir` parameter in your `yamldocs.yaml` [configuration](/docs/getting-started/configuration-options/).
It's worth noting that the use of Stencil templates is not mandatory when creating custom builders.

## Default Templates

The `reference_page.tpl` is the parent template that renders the final markdown page result. For instance, if you need to include a front-matter to your markdown, this is most probably the place where it should go.

The `reference_page_section.tpl` is a sub-template used to render each section of the generated page.

Here's the content of each file for reference:

#### reference_page.tpl

```markdown
    ## {{ title }}
    {{ description }}
    
    {{ content }}
```

- `{{ title }}` - high-level title of the document. When no metadata is defined, this is typically the name of the file without the extension.
- `{{ description }}` - can be defined via metadata or auto-generated as "{{ title }} reference docs".
- `{{ content }}` - content generated by the builder, which may consist of multiple sections.

#### reference_page_section.tpl
```markdown
    ## {{ item }}
    {{ description }}
    
    ### Reference
    
    {{ reference_table }}
    
    ### Example
    
    ```yaml
    {{ example }}
    ```
    
    {{ notes }}
```

- `{{ item }}` - section title. Can be defined via metadata or auto-generated from yaml node name.
- `{{ description }}` - section description. Defined via metadata.
- `{{ reerence_table }}` - the reference table is generated from second-level nodes in the yaml file.
- `{{ example }}` - optional, based on metadata only.
- `{{ notes }}` - optional, based on metadata only.

### Section Example

With the default builder, a section defined by the following yaml...

```yaml
Section1: #structure is based on the actual yaml
  Item1: value0
  Item2: value1
  Item3:
    - value12
    - value13
  Item4: value2

```

... is rendered as the following markdown:

```markdown
    ## Section1
    
    ### Reference
    
    | Directive | Expects             |
    |-----------|---------------------|
    | Item1     | (String) value0     |
    | Item2     | (String) value1     |
    | Item3     | (Array)             |
    | Item4     | (String) value2     |
```

## Generating content for Hugo websites

To generate content for a Hugo website, you'll want to overwrite the default `reference_page.tpl` to include a front-matter section.

What goes on the front-matter often depends on the theme and layouts used, which can have custom variables. A simple example would be:

```markdown
    ---
    title: "{{ title }}"
    description: "{{ description }}"
    weight: 1
    ---

    {{ description }}
    
    {{ content }}
```
